>> Anjana Vakil: My name is Anjana Vakil.
My name is Anjana Vakil.
The first version came out in 2020,
like eight lifetimes ago, right?
And so very excited to be back and
to be re-upping this course on
functional programming principles.
Now I will say functional programming
principles haven't changed a lot since,
well, the 1930s, let alone 2020.
My name is
Anjana Vakil.
And the hope is that
after taking this course,
you'll be really well set up to go on and
continue the entire rest of the functional
programming learning path on the other
Frontend masters courses that go a lot
more in depth into some of these topics
and also some of the tooling around it.
So today, what we're gonna be focusing
on is using vanilla JavaScript,
just the JavaScript we know and
love, mostly,
to get into our head the conceptual
framework, if you will,
not in the React sense, but
in the programming paradigm sense.
That we're gonna need to start using
functional principles in our JavaScript
code basis.
So a little a note on the materials.
You can find all of the materials for
this course at
functional-first-steps.netlify.app.
This is a course website
built in tutorial kit which
is a a product put out by a stack blitz,
so
we're gonna be working through
the whole course right in the browser.
You're not gonna need to download
anything or install anything.
But if you would like to there some
instructions at the bottom of the the main
page here on where you can
find the repository and
download the source code and
why not if you would like to but
right now we're just gonna all be working
through these exercises in the browser.
So we'll see how that goes as we move on.
So you might be wondering why I'm I here?
What I'm I doing in this course?
What are the life choices that
have led me to this moment?
And perhaps those life choices
also include things like becoming
a developer, starting to get
your kind of feet under you.
But realizing that as your programs
get more and more complex,
that complexity is increasingly difficult
to handle, and wondering if there might be
better ways of structuring your
programs and of structuring your code.
So that you can be more productive,
you can write more maintainable code,
code that's easier to predict,
to test, to debug, etc.
So you might be wondering,
how can I just get better at JavaScript?
And I think that functional programming
is one of the tools that we as JavaScript
programmers can use to make sure that
our JavaScript is the best it can be.
So, you might have been hearing about
terms from Functional Programming World,
or hearing about Functional Programming
is sort of the only way
real programmers work.
That's not what we're
gonna be doing today,
we're gonna be exploring it as a way.
So, what we're gonna be looking through
is kind of these questions like what
is functional programming.
I love the high level big picture.
What does it all mean, ma'am?
So we're gonna be talking about that, and
then we're gonna also be talking about how
code actually looks in
functional programming, and
how it feels to be
writing functional code.
We are gonna be doing everything in
JavaScript because you can actually do
functional programming in JavaScript
without having to learn a whole
new language like Haskell or
Clojure, or one of these,
what are more typically considered
functional programming languages.
So if you've been wondering like,
what is this functional programming thing,
why are so many of my dev heroes so
obsessed with it?
What does it all mean?
Can it even happen in JavaScript?
That's what we're gonna
be looking at today.
And the answer to the JavaScript
question is heck, yeah, it can.
So what we're gonna be doing is we're
gonna be exploring again the fundamentals.
They're really the ground floor, the first
steps is what this course is taking.
And as I mentioned, there's a whole
bunch of awesome deep dive courses on
the platform that you can continue
your learning journey with.
These are really just the first steps,
they are not all of the steps.
So what we'll be doing is we will be
looking at concepts like pure functions,
higher order functions,
first class functions, recursion.
And function composition and
all these other jargony words
that you might've heard about.
So we're gonna be exploring them as we go.
So as I mentioned,
everything here is in the browser.
You don't need to check out any
code locally, but if you'd like to,
there are instructions here.
So let's take a look at the plan for
this course.
We're gonna start out by talking about
the single most important concept,
if you take nothing else away from this
course, all I would like you to go home
with, if there's only one thing you get
to go home with, hopefully it's many.
The most important idea for
functional programming is
the idea of a pure function.
So we're gonna spend a lot
of time talking about that.
And then we're gonna move on to some
more kind of techniques that we use in
functional programming that are all based
around this concept of a pure function.
We're gonna talk about what purity is and
what it is not, and
how we manage the real world
in a pure functional program.
So we can actually do useful things,
and we'll talk about why that is
a challenge for functional programming.
Then we'll look at those techniques
like recursion, for example,
as an alternative to iteration for
doing an operation multiple times.
So we're gonna be writing
some recursive functions and
having some fun bending
our minds on that front.
We're also gonna talk about
higher order functions.
What they are?
There are a bunch that you
already know and love, and
if you're a JavaScript programmer,
chances are you've already used, or
probably even written
a higher order function.
You just might not know it yet.
So, we'll talk about that.
We'll also talk about some of
the functional programmers best friends,
which are functions like reduce,
map and filter.
So no, we're not gonna just be relying
on JavaScript to give us these methods.
We're gonna re implement them ourselves so
we understand how they work
in the functional world.
We're also gonna talk about
techniques such as writing closures.
So what that is a certain
type of function and
how it lets us kind of remember
data throughout our program.
And we'll talk about composing
functions together to build
pipelines through which our data flows,
making our programs essentially like one
long string of data transformations.
So we'll talk about functional composition
and how we put together pipelines.
And we will also spend a little bit of
time talking about how important immutable
data is for
functional programming and why.
And we'll look at a couple of ways, or
at least one library that we can use
to help us get that functionality into
JavaScript, which doesn't natively
support the kind of immutable data that
functional programmers like to work with.
Now the question is, why?
Why would we go through all of this
pain of learning jargon terms and
perhaps even different languages?
And why do programmers do this?
Why do we burden our minds with so
many different paradigms?
>> Anjana Vakil: Well, the thing is, if a
function is not looking at anything about
the world other than its inputs, and it's
not doing anything to the world other than
returning its output, that function
becomes a lot more predictable.
It becomes a lot easier to know exactly
what's gonna happen when I call this
function, becomes a lot easier to
test that, and it also means that I'm
gonna have less surprises,
when I am working in complex applications.
And somebody, my co-worker just changed
out the value of the name variable from
under me and I didn't know that and I was
relying on it being the original value,
bla, bla, bla, why do I have this bug?
This are the types of headaches we
wanna avoid by making sure all of our
functions are pure, and this helps
us write more fault tolerant and
more predictable, more testable,
more debuggable programs.
Is the hope and the goal.
And yes, like I said,
that has implications for
our day to day as developers.
So the hope is that if we work
in a pure functional world,
it helps us kind of move faster.
Because we don't have to be doing things
like figuring out what the state of
the program must be at this
particular line in its execution and
how that might be affected by the weather
outside or the time of day or whatever.
We just know this function is
gonna do exactly one thing, and
I can verify that it's doing
what I thought it was gonna do.
>> Anjana Vakil: Some reasons
that some other people use for
doing functional programming
is to feel smart and
put down other programmers by saying
that the way that we functional
programmers do it is the best way,
or sometimes even the only way.
None of that.
We don't need any of that.
We can be perfectly productive programmers
without using functional programming.
What we're interested in are the concrete
benefits for our life as developers,
the headaches it can save us,
the years of life that it can give us back
by not stressing us out over mutable
variables, things like that.
So this why I think we should
use functional JavaScript,
is because of those concrete benefits.
Like I mentioned, one of the motivations
that I have for learning functional
programming was I was starting to learn
JavaScript about 10 years ago, geez.
And I was getting a lot of headaches,
I was like used to a different object
oriented language at the time,
I was a Python developer, and I was trying
to map those principles to JavaScript.
And I was like, what is happening?
We have prototypes.
There's this keyword everywhere, and
I got to memorize a bunch of rules for
it and what's going on.
So I personally think that doing object
oriented programming in JavaScript
gets pretty tricky, pretty fast.
And I found that doing things
on a functional style, or
at least a more functional style,
helped me worry less and
program more,
[LAUGH] let's put it that way.
So I think that functional
JavaScript makes a ton of sense.
There's also a lot of people doing
functional programming in JavaScript,
even if they might not
advertise it as such.
So there is a ton of community resources,
libraries,
tools, frameworks, for example, React.
Any React users out there?
A couple hands.
Is heavily inspired
atleast in its hook-based
instance from principles
of functional programming.
And the entire way that React apps
work with this reactive updates and
the declarative way that we say, I want
the element to look like this is very
much in line with functional programming.
So functional programming has had a pretty
big influence on the web community,
especially in the last 10 years or so.
So it's great to be doing a style of
programming in a setting where you have
other people around you, other community
resources, other courses, other entire
learning paths on Frontend Masters to
help support you through that journey.
So that's, I think another great reason
that JavaScript makes sense as a first
step for functional programming, even if
you go on to get super into the category
theory and the monoids and the functors
and the haskells and the closures.
Even if you go on to do all of that,
I think JavaScript is a great place to
explore the fundamentals because
it has everything we need,
it's right in the browser, and we have
this whole community to help us learn.